## Functions

Function is a named sequence of statements that performs a computation. 
When defining a function, we specify the name of the sequence of statements. 
Later, we can call the function by name.

ex:
>>> type(32)
<class 'int>

This is called a type function. 
What's within the parentheses is called an argument.
The argument is a value or variable that we're passing into the function as input to the function. 
The result, for the type function, is the type of argument. 

A function takes in an argument and returns a result. 
The result is called the return value.

## Built-in function

Python provides a number of important built0in functions we can use without providing the function definition. 

The max and min functions gives us the largest and smallest values within a list. 

>>> max('Hello world')
'w'
>>> min('Hello world')
' '
>>>

What is the max function?
It tells us the largest character in the string. 

What is the min function?
It tells us the smallest character. Which is a space.

What is the len function?
Tells us how many items are in the argument. 
If the argument to len is a string, it returns the number of characters in the string.

>>> len('Hello world')
11
>>>

These functions are not limited to looking at strings. They can operate on any set of values as well.

Built-in functions should be treated as reserved words.

## Type conversion functions

Python provides built-in functions that convert values from one type to another. 
The int function takes any value and converts it to an integer. It if can or complains otherwise.

>>> int('32')
32
>>> int('Hello')
Value Error: invalid literal for int() with base 10: 'Hello'

int can convert floating point values to integers, but it doesn't round off, it chops off at the fraction part.
>>> int(3.9999999)
3
>>> int(-2.3)
-2

float converts integers and strings to floating-point numbers
>>> float(32)
32.0
>>> float('3.14159)
3.14159

str converts its argument to a string
>>> str(32)
'32'
>>> str(3.14159)
'3.14159'

## Math Functions

Python has a math module that provides most of the familiar mathematical functions. Before we can use it, we have to import it.

>>> import math

This statement creates a module object named math. If we print the module object, we can get information about it.
>>> print(math)
<module 'math' (built-in)>

The module object contains the functions and variables defined in the module. To access one of the functions, we have to specify the name of the module and the name of the function, with dot notation. 


>>> ratio - signal_power / noise_power
>>> decibles = 10 * math.log10(ratio)
Here we compute the logarithm base 10 of the signal-to-noise ratio. The math module also provides a function called log that computes logarithms base e.

>>> radians = 0.7
>>> height = math.sin(radius)
Here we find the sine of radians. The name of the variable is a hint that sin and the other trigonometric functions (cos, tan, etc.) take arguments in radians. 

>>> degrees = 45
>>> radians = degrees / 360.0 * 2 * math.pi
>>> math.sin(radians)
To convert from degrees to radians, divide by 360 and multiply by 2π:
0.7071067811865476

The expression math.pi gets the variable pi from the math module. The value of this variable is an approximation of π, accurate to about 15 digits. 
We can check the previous result by comparing it to the square root of two divided by two:

>>> math.sqrt(2) / 2.0
0.7071067811865476

# Random numbers

Most computer programs generate the same outputs every time, meaning deterministic.
Determinism is usually a good thing, since we expect the same calculation to yield the same result. 

For some applications, we want the computer to be unpredictable. A great example are games. 

Making a game that is nondeterministic isn't easy. 
Ways to make something nondeterministic is by using algorithms, that generate pseudorandom numbers.

Pseudorandom numbers are not truly random because they are generated by deterministic computation, but looking at the numbers it is all but impossible to distinguish from the random.

The random module provides functions that generate pseudorandom numbers.

The function random returns a random float between 0.0 and 1.0 (including 0.0 but not 1.0).
Each time we call random, we get the next number in a long series. To see a sample, lets run this loop:

import random

for i in range(10):
    x = random.random()
    print(x)
This program produces the following list of 10 random numbers between 0.0 and up to but not including 1.0.

0.11132867921152356
0.5950949227890241
0.04820265884996877
0.841003109276478
0.997914947094958
0.04842330803368111
0.7416295948208405
0.510535245390327
0.27447040171978143
0.028511805472785867

see exercise ex_04_01.py

The random function is only one of the many functions that handle random numbers. The function randint takes the parameters low and high, and returns an integer between low and high (including both). 

To choose an element from a sequence at random, we can use choice:

The random module also provides functions to generate random values from continuous distributions including Gaussian, exponential, gamma, and more.

# Adding new functions

We can add new functions. A function definition specifies the name of a new function and the sequence of statements that execute when the function is called. Once we define a function, we can reuse the function over and over throughout our program.

def print_lyrics():
    print("I'm a lumberjack, and I'm okay.")
    print('I sleep all night and I work all day.")

def is a keyword that indicates that this is a function definition.
The name of the function is print_lyrics. 
The rules for function names are the same for variable names: 
letters, numbers and some punctuation are legal, but the first character cannot be a number. Can't use keyword as the name of a function, and avoid having variable and a function with the same name.

The empty parentheses after the name indicate that this function doesn't take any arguments. We'll build functions that take arguments as their inputs. 

The fist line of the function definition is called the header; the rest is called the body. The header has to end with a colon and the body has to be indented. By convention, the indentation is always four spaces. The body can contain any number of statements.

If you type a function definition in interactive mode, the interpreter prints ellipses(...) to let you know that the definition isn't complete:

>>> def print_lyrics():
    print("I'm a lumberjack, and I'm okay.")
    print('I sleep all night and I work all day.')

To end the function we need to enter an empty line (this is in interactive mode)

Defining a function creates a variable with the same name
Defining a function creates a variable with the same name.

>>> print(print_lyrics)
<function print_lyrics at 0xb7e99e9c>
>>> print(type(print_lyrics))
<class 'function'>
The value of print_lyrics is a function object, which has type “function”.

The syntax for calling the new function is the same as for built-in functions:

>>> print_lyrics()
I'm a lumberjack, and I'm okay.
I sleep all night and I work all day.

Once we defined a function, we can use it inside another function. 
To repeat the previous refrain, we could write a function called repeat_lyrics:

def repeat_lyrics():
    print_lyrics()
    print_lyrics()

Then call our repeat_lyrics function:
>>> repeat_lyrics()
I'm a lumberjack, and I'm okay.
I sleep all night and I work all day.
I'm a lumberjack, and I'm okay.
I sleep all night and I work all day.

# Definitions and uses

Pulling together the code fragments from the previous section, the whole program looks like this:

def print_lyrics():
    print("I'm a lumberjack, and I'm okay.")
    print('I sleep all night and I work all day.')


def repeat_lyrics():
    print_lyrics()
    print_lyrics()

repeat_lyrics()

This program contains two function definitions: print_lyrics and repeat_lyrics. 
Function definitions get executed just like other statements, but the effect is to create function objects.

The statements inside the function do not get executed until the function is called, the function definition generated no output. 

As we might expect, we have to create a function before we can execute it. 
The function definition has to be executed before the first time it is called.

# Flow of execution

What is the flow of execution?
The order to ensure that a function is defined before it's first use, we have to know the order in which statements are executed. 

Execution begins at the first statement of the program. Statements are executed one at a time, in order from top to bottom. 

Function definitions do not alter the flow of execution of the program, but statements inside the function are not executed until the function is called.

A function call is like a detour in the flow of execution. Instead of going to the next statement, the flow jumps to the body of the function, executes all the statements there, and then comes back to pick up where it left off.

It's simple until we remember that one function can call another. While in the middle of one function, the program might have to execute the statements of another function. 

Python is good a keeping track of where it is, so each time a function completes, the program picks up where it left off in the function that called it. When it gets to the end of the program, it terminates.

It makes sense if you follow the flow of execution. 

# Parameters and arguments

Some of the built-in functions require arguments. Some functions take more than one arguments: math.pow takes two, the base and the exponent.

Inside the function, the arguments are assigned to variables called parameters. Here's an example of a user-defined function that takes an argument:

def print_twice(bruce):
    print(bruce)
    print(bruce)

This function assigns the arguments to a parameter named bruce. When the function is called, it prints the value of the parameter (whatever it is) twice. 

This function works with any value that can be printed.

>>> print_twice('Spam')
Spam
Spam
>>> print_twice(17)
17
17
>>> import math
>>> print_twice(math.pi)
3.141592653589793
3.141592653589793

The same rules of composition that apply to built-in functions also apply to user-defined functions, we can use any kind of expression as an argument for print_twice:

>>> print_twice('Spam '*4)
Spam Spam Spam Spam
Spam Spam Spam Spam
>>> print_twice(math.cos(math.pi))
-1.0
-1.0

The argument is evaluated before the function is called, so in the examples the expressions 'Spam ' *4 and math.cos(math.pi) are only evaluated once.

You can also use a variable as an argument.

>>> michael = 'Eric, the half a bee.'
>>> print_twice(michael)
Eric, the half a bee.
Eric, the half a bee.

The name of the variable we pass as an argument (michael) has nothing to do with the name of the parameter (bruce). It doesn't matter what the value was called back home (in the caller); here in print_twice, we call everybody bruce.

# Fruitful functions and void functions

Some of the functions we're using, math functions, yield results; We call them fruitful functions. Functions like print_twice, are called void functions since they perform an action but don't return a value. 

When we call a fruitful function, we almost always want to do something with the result; for example, we might assign it to a variable or use it as a part of an expression:

x = math.cos(radians)
golden = (math.sqrt(5) + 1) / 2

When we call a function in interactive mode, Python displays the result:
>>> math.sqrt(5)
2.23606797749979

In a script, we call a fruitful function and do not store the result of the function in a variable, the return vanishes into the mist!

math.sqrt(5)

This script computes the square root of 5, but since it doesn't store the result in a variable or display the result, it is not very useful.

Void functions might display something on the screen or have some other effect, but they don't have a return value. If we try to assign the result to a variable, we get a special value called None.

>>> result = print_twice('Bing')
Bing
Bing
>>> print(result)
None

The value None is not the same as the string 'None'. It is a special value that has its own type:

>>> print(type(None))
<class 'NoneType'>

To return a result from a function, we use the return statement in our function. For example:

A function called addtwo that adds two numbers and returns a result

def addtwo(a, b):
    added = a + b
    return added

x = addtwo(3, 5)
print(x)

When this script executes, the print statement will print out '8' because the addtwo function was called with 3 and 5 as arguments. Within the function, the parameters a and b are placeholders for 3 and 5. 

The function computed the sum of the two numbers and placed it in the local function variable name added. The it used the return statement to send the computed value back to the calling code as the function result, which was assigned to the variable x and printed out. 

# Why functions?

- Creating a new function gives us opportunity to name a group of statements, which makes our program easier to read, understand, and debug.
- Functions can make a program smaller by eliminating repetitive code. Later, if we make a change, we only have to make it in one place.
- Dividing a long program into functions allows us to debug the parts one at a time and then assemble them into working whole.
- Well-designed functions are often useful for many programs. Once we write and debug one, we can reuse it. 

Often we function definitions are used to explain a concept. Part of the skill of creating and using functions is to have a function properly capture an idea such as 'find the smallest value in a list of values'. 

# Debugging

The best way to avoid problems with spaces and tabs is to use spaces exclusively (no tabs). Most text editors that know about Python do this by default, but some don't.

Tabs and spaces are usually invisible, which makes them hard to debug, so find an editor that manages indentation for you.

Don't forget to save your program before running it. Some dev environments do this automatically, but some don't. 

Debugging can take a long time if you keep running the same incorrect program over and over. 

Make sure the code you're looking at is the code you're running. If not sure print something like print('hello') at the beginning of the program and run it again. If you don't see hello, you're not running the right program!





